**Section 6.10: Unsupervised Learning in Python**

**Duration:** 3 hours

**Concepts:**

-   Principal Components Analysis

-   Matrix Completion

-   K-Means Clustering

-   Hierarchical Clustering

**Textbook section:** An Introduction to Statistical Learning in Python,
Chapter 12

| **Materials and Resources** | **Learning Goals** |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|
| - Computers for students with Jupyter Notebook<br>- Unsupervised learning slides<br>- Unsupervised learning exercises Jupyter Notebook file | - What is PCA and why is it useful<br>- Clustering methods |


**Duration** | **Lesson Section** | **Learning Objectives**
-------------|--------------------|-----------------------
40 mins | Go through the "Principal Components Analysis" section. | - Finding the first principal component<br>- Finding the next principal components<br>- Loading vectors<br>- Scores<br>- Interpretation of principal components<br>- Biplot<br>- PVE<br>- Scree plot
15 mins | Go through the "Principal Components Analysis" section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Use `PCA()` to perform PCA<br>- Make biplots<br>- Interpret results<br>- Make scree plot
5 mins | Go through the "Missing Values and Matrix Completion" section. | - Basic idea of matrix completion
10 mins | Go through the "Matrix Completion" section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Filling in missing matrix values<br>- Compute the correlation between the true and filled-in values
20 mins | Go through the "K-Means Clustering" section. | - K-means clustering algorithm
20 mins | Go through the "K-Means Clustering" section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Use `KMeans()` to cluster 2D and 4D data<br>- Make visualisations of clustered data<br>- Use PCA to visualise the 4D clusters
20 mins | Go through the "Hierarchical Clustering" section. | - Dendrogram<br>- Dissimilarity measures<br>- Complete, average, single, and centroid linkage<br>- Hierarchical clustering algorithm
15 mins | Go through the "Hierarchical Clustering" section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Use the `HClust` function to cluster<br>- Plot dendrograms
