**Section 6.6: Beyond Linearity in Python**

**Duration:** 2.5 hours

**Concepts:**

-   Polynomial Regression

-   Step Functions

-   Regression Splines

-   Smoothing Splines

-   Local Regression

-   Generalised Additive Models

**Textbook section:** An Introduction to Statistical Learning on Python,
Chapter 7
| **Materials and Resources**          | **Learning Goals**               |
|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| - Computers for students with Jupyter Notebook | - Fit the different models to dat<br>- Use anovas to pick the best model complexity<br>- Slides<br>- Exercises in Jupyter Notebook file |

**Duration** | **Lesson Section**                        | **Learning Objectives**
-------------|-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------
10 mins      | Go through the polynomial regression section of the slides. | - Polynomial regression
20 mins      | Go through the polynomial regression section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Use `sm.OLS()` to fit a polynomial regression<br>- Plot fit with confidence intervals<br>- Use `anova_lm()` to compare polynomial regression of increasing degrees
8 mins       | Go through the step function section.     | - Step function
15 mins      | Go through the step function section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Use `pd.qcut()` and `pd.get_dummies()` to fit a step function<br>- Make predictions
15 mins      | Go through the regression splines section. | - Regression splines<br>- Degrees of freedom<br>- Location and number of knots<br>- Constraints of regression splines
15 mins      | Go through the regression splines section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Use `bs()` to fit a piecewise polynomial regression<br>- Use `NaturalSpline()` and `ns()` to fit a natural spline<br>- Plot results with confidence intervals
15 mins      | Go through the local regression section.  | - Local regression
15 mins      | Go through the local regression section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Use `lowess()` to perform local regression<br>- Plot the results with confidence intervals
10 mins      | Go through the generalised additive models section. | - GAMs<br>- Pros and cons of GAMs
20 mins      | Go through the generalised additive models section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Fit a GAM to data<br>- Use `plot_gam()` to summarise it<br>- Use an anova to choose best GAM
