# Section 6.7: Tree Based Methods in Python

**Duration:** 2.5 hours

**Concepts:**

-   Regression trees

-   Classification trees

-   Bagging

-   Random forests

-   Boosting

-   Bayesian additive regression trees

**Textbook section:** An Introduction to Statistical Learning in Python,
Chapter 8
| **Materials and Resources** | **Learning Goals** |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|
| - Computers for students with Jupyter Notebook<br>- Tree Based Methods Slides<br>- Tree Based Methods Exercises Jupyter Notebook file | - Decision trees for regression and classification<br>- Several methods for improving the prediction accuracy of trees |


**Duration** | **Lesson Section**                        | **Learning Objectives**
-------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------
40 mins      | Go through the regression trees and classification trees sections. | - What is a tree?<br>- Algorithm to build trees<br>- Recursive binary splitting<br>- Cost complexity pruning<br>- Trees for classification<br>- Trees for regression
25 mins      | Go through the "Fitting Classification Trees" and "Fitting Regression Trees" sections in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Fitting regression and classification trees with `DecisionTreeClassifier()`<br>- Plotting trees<br>- Pruning trees with `cost_complexity_pruning_path()`<br>- Estimating test error rate
15 mins      | Go through the bagging and random forests sections. | - Bagging method for regression and classification trees<br>- Out-of-bag error estimation<br>- Random forests method for regression and classification trees
10 mins      | Go through the "Bagging and Random Forests" sections in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Fit bagged regression trees and random forests with `RandomForestRegressor()`<br>- Use `feature_importances_` to measure relative importance of variables
15 mins      | Go through the boosting section.          | - The boosting method for regression trees<br>- Important parameters
15 mins      | Go through the "Boosting" section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Fit boosted regression trees with `GradientBoostingRegressor()`<br>- Look at the relative importance of variables
15 mins      | Go through the Bayesian Additive Regression Trees section. | - The BART method for regression trees
8 mins       | Go through the "Bayesian Additive Regression Trees" section in the Jupyter Notebook file as a class. | - Fit BART using `BART()`<br>- Compare test errors between methods
